Resumption of the session
I hereby declare resumed the session of the European Parliament which was suspended on Friday, 17 December. I would like to wish you all the best once again for the New Year and hope that you had a pleasant holiday.
As you will have noticed, the much-feared ‘millennium bug’ has not materialised. However, citizens of some of our Member States have fallen victim to terrible natural disasters.
There is a desire within Parliament to hold a debate during this part-session in the coming days.
Today I would ask you – and this is also the wish of a number of colleagues – to observe a minute’s silence in memory of all the victims of the storms, particularly in the various countries of the European Union.
I ask you to rise for a minute’s silence.
(The House rises for a minute’s silence.)
Madam President, on a point of order.
As you are no doubt aware from the press and television, there have been several bomb explosions in Sri Lanka, resulting in numerous deaths.
Among the victims of the recent attacks in Sri Lanka is Mr Kumar Ponnambalam, who visited the European Parliament only a few months ago.
Would it be appropriate, Madam President, for you to write to the President of Sri Lanka to convey Parliament’s condolences on the violent deaths of Mr Ponnambalam and other Sri Lankan citizens, and to urge her to do everything in her power to seek a peaceful solution to this very difficult situation?
Yes, Mr Evans, I think such an initiative is entirely appropriate.
If the House agrees, I shall follow Mr Evans’s suggestion.
Madam President, on a point of order.
Could you provide me with clarification regarding Rule 143 in relation to inadmissibility?
My question concerns a matter which will be raised on Thursday and to which I shall refer again then.
On Thursday, Parliament will be considering the Cunha report on multiannual guidance programmes, which proposes in paragraph 6 that countries failing to meet their fleet reduction targets should be subject to an annual quota penalty.
Such penalties are to be imposed despite the principle of relative stability.
I believe that the principle of relative stability is a fundamental legal principle of the common fisheries policy and that a proposal to undermine it would be legally inadmissible.
I would like to know whether it is possible to raise an objection to a document which is merely a report and not a legislative proposal, and whether I am authorised to do so on Thursday.
You may raise this issue at that very moment, if you wish, i.e. on Thursday at the start of the debate on the report.
Madam President!
Unfortunately, the European Parliament’s first part-session of this year coincides with the scheduled execution, this Thursday, of a 34-year-old man named Hicks, who has been sentenced to death in the United States, in Texas.
At the request of a French Member, Mr Zimeray, a petition has already been submitted, which has been signed by many, including myself.
However, in accordance with the line now consistently taken by the European Parliament and the European Union as a whole, I would ask you to bring to bear the full influence of your office and of the institution you represent on the presidential candidate and Governor of Texas, George W. Bush, who has the power to stay the execution and to pardon the condemned man.
All this is in line with the principles we have always defended.
Thank you very much, Mr Segni, I shall be happy to do so.
This is entirely in keeping with the position we as a Parliament have always taken.
Madam President, I would like to draw your attention to a case which this Parliament has repeatedly addressed.
This is the case of Alexander Nikitin.
We are all delighted here that the court has acquitted him and made it clear that access to environmental information is a constitutional right in Russia too.
However, the situation is now that he is to be charged again because the public prosecutor is appealing.
We know, and we have stated this in a great many resolutions – particularly during the last plenary session of last year – that this is not merely a legal case and that it is wrong to accuse Alexander Nikitin of criminality and treason, because we, as those affected, benefit from his findings.
These findings form the basis for the European programmes to protect the Barents Sea, and I therefore ask you to examine a draft letter setting out the key facts and to make this position clear in Russia in accordance with Parliament’s resolutions.
Mrs Schroedter, I am happy to examine the relevant facts once I have received your letter.
Madam President, first of all, many thanks for keeping your word; the range of television channels available in our offices has indeed been greatly expanded in this first part-session of the new year.
Nevertheless, Madam President, my request has not been met.
Although we can now receive two Finnish and one Portuguese channel, we still cannot receive a Dutch channel. I had, however, asked you for a Dutch channel, as we Dutch also wish to follow the news when we are sent here into exile every month.
I would therefore ask you once again to ensure that a Dutch channel is also included.
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel, I can inform you that this item is on the Quæstors’ agenda for Wednesday.
I hope that a decision will be taken there in line with your wishes.
Madam President, can you tell me why this Parliament does not comply with the health and safety regulations it has itself adopted?
Why has the air quality in this building not been checked once since our election?
Why has the Health and Safety Committee not met once since 1998?
Why have no fire drills taken place in either the Brussels or Strasbourg Parliament buildings?
Why are there no fire safety briefings?
Why was nothing done to make the stairs safer after my accident?
Why is the smoking ban not enforced in the non-smoking areas?
It is a disgrace that we adopt rules which we then fail to follow ourselves.
Mrs Lynne, you are absolutely right, and I will look into whether all this is indeed the case.
I will also put the matter to the Quaestors. I am sure they attach great importance to our own compliance with the legislation we adopt.
Madam President, Mrs Díez González and I had tabled a number of questions regarding certain comments made by the Vice-President, Mrs de Palacio, which had been reported in a Spanish newspaper.
The relevant services did not include them on the agenda, as they believed they had already been answered in a previous sitting.
I would ask that this decision be reconsidered, because that is not the case.
The questions answered previously related to Mrs de Palacio’s conduct in a specific matter, not to the statements published in the daily newspaper ABC on 18 November last year.
My dear colleague, we will look into this.
However, I must tell you that I find the situation somewhat confusing at the moment.
We will, however, examine this very carefully to ensure that everything is in order.
Madam President, I would like to know whether Parliament will send a clear signal this week of our dissatisfaction with today’s decision to reject an extension of the arms embargo against Indonesia, particularly as the vast majority in this Parliament has in the past spoken out in favour of the arms embargo against Indonesia.
Today’s decision against extending the embargo poses a very great danger, given the situation there.
Parliament should send a message to that effect, as this is in line with the wishes of the vast majority.
The EU Member States’ refusal to extend the embargo is irresponsible.
As has already been noted, the situation in Indonesia is extremely unstable.
There is even a risk of a military coup.
We do not know what will happen.
So why should arms manufacturers in the EU be raking in profits at the expense of innocent people?
This item is not currently scheduled for Thursday’s urgent debate.
Order of business
The next item is the consideration of the final draft agenda, as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents on Thursday 13 January in accordance with Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
There are no amendments for Monday and Tuesday.
Regarding Wednesday:
The Socialist Group has requested that a statement by the Commission on its strategic objectives for the next five years and on the Commission’s administrative reform be included on the agenda.
I would ask the proposer, Mr Barón Crespo, to explain the reasons for his request, if he so wishes.
We shall then proceed as usual: one speaker in favour, one against.
Madam President! The presentation of the Prodi Commission’s political programme for the entire parliamentary term stemmed from a proposal by the Group of the Party of European Socialists, which received the unanimous approval of the Conference of Presidents in September and also the express consent of President Prodi, who reaffirmed his commitment in his inaugural address.
This commitment is significant in that the Commission is an institution which, under the Treaties, has the exclusive right of initiative and will therefore fundamentally shape the political and legislative activity of this Parliament over the next five years.
I would also like to recall that, during the previous parliamentary term, this Parliament twice expressed its confidence in President Prodi; during this parliamentary term, it expressed its confidence in him again in July, and then, once the new Commission was in office, there was another vote of confidence in the Commission as a whole in September.
The Commission has therefore already had sufficient time to draw up its programme, and we have had sufficient time to familiarise ourselves with it and explain it to the public.
In this context, I would refer to the resolution of 15 September, which recommended that the proposal be submitted as soon as possible.
The events of the past week – which began on the fringes of the Conference of Presidents, a meeting that was used merely to confirm and ratify decisions taken elsewhere – highlight a dilemma: either the Commission is unable to present this programme (in which case it should provide clarification.
According to its President, it is capable of doing so.
Since the Commission is represented by the Vice-President, Mrs de Palacio, I consider it appropriate, before the vote, to ascertain the Commission’s position regarding its readiness to present the programme as agreed.), or Parliament is not in a position to examine this programme, as some apparently claim.
In my view, this second hypothesis would amount to a dereliction of our responsibility as a Parliament and, furthermore, to the introduction of an original thesis, an unknown method, which would consist of providing the political groups with the Commission’s policy statement in written form a week in advance – and not, as agreed, the day before – bearing in mind that the legislative programme will be discussed in February, so that we could dispense with the debate, as the press and the internet would have informed all citizens about it the following day and Parliament would no longer have any reason to deal with the matter.
Since my group believes that a parliament is there to listen, discuss and reflect, we see no justification for this delay, and we believe that, if the Commission is able to do so, we are well within the timeframe to reinstate the original agreement between Parliament and the Commission and to be able to face our fellow citizens in a responsible manner.
That is why the proposal from the Group of the Party of European Socialists, which you mentioned, is to retain Wednesday as the date for the presentation of the Prodi Commission’s programme for the parliamentary term, and to include the administrative reform project in this programme as well, as we might otherwise find ourselves in a paradoxical situation: On the one hand, using the excuse that the text is not available, the President of the Commission is being denied the right to speak in this House, and on the other hand, a debate on the reform would take place without this House having first been able to read the texts on which the debate is based.
I therefore ask you, Madam President, to request the Commission to speak now and then to proceed to the vote.
(Applause from the PSE Group)
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am somewhat surprised by the behaviour of Mr Barón Crespo, who is now demanding that this item be placed on Wednesday’s agenda.
Mr Barón Crespo, you were unable to attend last Thursday’s Conference of Presidents.
I am not criticising that; it does happen from time to time that one is represented by a proxy.
Mr Hänsch represented you there.
We held a detailed debate in the Conference of Presidents.
Only your group supported the view you are now expressing.
We then voted.
Each chairperson has as many votes as there are members in their group.
There was a vote on this point.
As I recall, the result of that vote was 422 to 180, with a few abstentions.
That means all the groups, with the exception of the non-attached Members – though they are not a group – were in agreement; only your group was of the opinion that we should proceed as you have proposed here.
Everyone else disagreed.
That was the decision. 
